# Miscellaneous bioinformatics

Navigating common challenges in microbial ecology.

## Cutadapt
How to trim primer sequences from reads generated by Illumina. We currently have code for prokaryotic V3-V4, V4, and V4-V5 16S rRNA gene regions; and eukaryotic 18S rRNA gene regions.


## DADA2

1. <b>filterAndTrim_bigData.R.</b> At the [filter and trim](https://benjjneb.github.io/dada2/tutorial.html) step, process groups of samples one at a time instead of all samples simultaneously. Saves time and computer power and crashes and headaches.

2. <b>merge_ASV_tables.R.</b> Helpful when you have many ASV tables from DADA2 and want to merge them by unique FASTA sequences.


## Multiplexing
<b>Protocol.</b> How to sort barcoded illumina reads into individual FASTQ files... The easy way to taxonomically identify microbial isolates! Includes a program (demultiplexFASTQ.py) and a four-sample dataset.


## exactMatching
<b>Protocol.</b> We commonly want to find exact matches between sequences in two FASTA files. When files are large, we don't always need or want the robust BLAST algorithm. This is a perl program that is fast, light, and easy.


## NCBI
1. <b>removeLineBreakFASTA.sh.</bDownloading contigs from NCBI, there are line breaks at 800bp. Remove those with this.

2. </b>downloadMultipleSRA_series.sh.</b> Download multiple files from Sequence Read Archive. Use when you're interested in runs that are named as a series of numbers, which is typical for BioProjects (e.g., runs in project PRJNA597057 range from SRR10755563 to SRR10755886).

3. <b>downloadMultipleSRA_text.sh.</b> Download multiple files from Sequence Read Archive. Use when you're interested in runs that are not named in a series. Create a text file called "runs.txt" with all desired runs.


## navigate_FASTQ-A
1. <b>catFASTQ.sh.</b> Concatenate FASTQ files with identical names. Its original purpose was to combine files from two sequencing runs (on full and nano Illumina flow cells) on the same samples. 

2. </b>demultiplexFASTQ.sh.</b> Trim primers and sort reads according to their unique barcodes. [Mothur](https://mothur.org/wiki/make.contigs/) has this ability, however it also merges paired-end reads in the process. This script's original purpose was to sort reads from mutiple isolate 16S rRNA genes, sequenced simultaneously, based on unique oligos on the 5' ends of primers. This will be updated so it will take a list of file names as input.


## ARG_tools
1. <b>rgiFASTA.sh.</b> Mine ARGs from FASTAs in a directory with CARD's resistance gene identifier ([RGI](https://card.mcmaster.ca/analyze/rgi)).

2. <b>deepARG_organize.R.</b> Load and organize results from the [deepARG](https://bench.cs.vt.edu/deeparg_analyze/) online tool. 

3. <b>fastaToCSV.sh.</b> Have a FASTA file? Want to work with it in Excel or R? Use this. Remember to make it executable: `chmod u+x fastaToCSV.sh` The result is a spreadsheet with two columns, "Headers" and "FASTA."
